Good morning, everybody.
Glad you're here.
Wanna start with the question?
Have you ever tried really, really, really hard to fix something only to make it worse?
Anybody else?
Anybody?
Yeah.
All you raising your hand, thank you for being honest.
I'm just kidding.
I remember very, it's kind of funny, the things I remember sometimes the most innocuous moments in life, like they shouldn't matter or stay in your memory, but there's a particular point I remember where I tried really hard to fix something and it didn't go well.
I was a kid and I was trying to rewind the garden hose that had been time to water the plants and the hose was on one of those
You know, things you can just crank and spin and you can just pull it and let it out.
And so it was wrapped around the house or whatever.
And I was sitting here just twisting it back up.
Unfortunately, I was watching the hose like from the distance and not paying attention to the fact that it had got caught in the spoke.
So I keep trying to turn it to wheel it back in and it stops.
I can't get it to move.
So what did I do?
Well, I thought to myself, I guess I just got to push harder.
And so I just kept with all of my might pushing.
It kind of started to go, but it still kept getting stuck.
I'm still oblivious to the fact that it's caught.
And so I just push as hard as I can and then snap.
The handle breaks right off.
Now I just stood there outside stunned, wondering how I was going to explain why our hose reel no longer had a handle on it.
I learned a couple important lessons that day, but there was one that stuck with me.
Sometimes the problem isn't a lack of effort.
Sometimes the problem is the kind of effort we're using.
Because pushing harder doesn't fix everything.
In fact, sometimes pushing harder is exactly what breaks it.
And if we're honest, that's how a lot of us approach
the Christian faith, the Christian life.
We feel stuck, we see something in us that needs to change, we notice impatience maybe, frustration, pride building up, comparison with others, grumbling, and our instinct is the same as mine was with the hose.
We try harder, we push more,
We crank down on behavior.
We white knuckle our obedience.
But what if the Christian life isn't primarily about pushing harder?
What if transformation doesn't start with more force?
What if something deeper is happening inside that is more powerful, more capable,
of bringing about the change that we know that we need.
We are in the middle of studying through Philippians chapter two.
TJ did an awesome, fantastic job in the first part last week.
He actually preached through one of my favorite passages.
I love the hymn about Jesus, about his humility, about his obedience to the Father,
And obviously, those of us that are Christians believe that Jesus' faithfulness to the Father is what makes us in right relationship with the Father, what gives us salvation, what gives us a path toward righteousness.
And so Paul's gonna carry on based on the humility and faithfulness of Jesus,
letter to the Philippian Christians.
And what we're gonna find when we look at verses 12 through 18 today, that the problem facing the Philippian Christians is not laziness, it's not lack of effort, but a misunderstanding about how real change happens.
I tend to find that from a theological standpoint that this issue that Paul talks about in this section
is one of the ones that becomes most misunderstood and creates much more weight on our shoulders as believers than we like to give credit for.
And so if you have your Bibles or if you wanna follow on the screen, we're gonna look to Philippians chapter two verses 12 through 18 today and see what Paul says about this issue of pushing too hard and not realizing where real change comes from.
Here's what he writes.
says, therefore, my dear friends, just as you have always obeyed, so now, not only in my presence, but even more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For it is God who is working in you, both to will and to work according to his good purpose.
Do everything without grumbling and arguing.
so that you may be blameless and pure, children of God who are faultless and a crooked and perverted generation among whom you shine like stars in the world by holding firm to the word of life.
Then I can boast in the day of Christ that I didn't run or labor for nothing.
But even if I am poured out as a drink offering on the sacrificial service of your faith, I am glad and I rejoice with all of you.
In the same way, you should also be glad and rejoice with me.
So in verse 12 here, Paul encourages all the Philippian believers to continue in their obedience to God.
This was a church that was bound to Paul and his own predicament of being in chains.
Remember, he writes this letter from prison.
And of course, they have experienced being up against the world around them and living out their own faith, but they continued and have a reputation for being obedient in faith.
And yet, when you are up against persecution, when you're up against trial, when you're up against difficulties in life, it is a day at a time sort of step of obedience.
And so Paul still wants the right to encourage the Philippians
to continue to be obedient as they already had been.
And it is a continuance because they're already reputed as having been obedient before.
So Paul is encouraging them to keep it up.
But I want you to notice what he's also saying.
He's saying, don't let your obedience depend on supervision.
He encourages the Philippian disciples to keep obeying when no one's watching, including Paul himself.
who's obviously absent because he can't physically be there.
He's stuck in prison.
But the second half of the verse has often troubled theologians and everyday Christians alike.
Paul says to work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
But catch this, Paul does not say to work for your salvation.
He says to work out your own salvation, not to work for your salvation.
And so to put more succinctly, you've received salvation, now let it show up and show out in your daily life.
That's what Paul says.
Let what God has done inside of you be visible on the outside.
Let Christ humility, as he described in Philippians 2, 6 through 11,
become the culture that forms your words and deeds.
Salvation isn't meant to sit inside us, it's meant to take shape in how we treat one another.
And when Paul says fear and trembling, he's talking about our obedience being rooted in our reverence toward God.
The book of Proverbs famously says that wisdom begins with fear of the Lord.
fear.
Now this isn't to mean being spooked out and go hiding, but to recognize his grander in our place and his good creation and to act accordingly with reverence.
So it means living with awareness that God is holy, present, and at work.
It means refusing to treat discipleship obedience to Jesus casually
because the living God is shaping your life right now.
But then in verse 13, and this is really vital what he does here, Paul immediately guards against self-powered religion when he writes, for it is God who is working in you, both to will and to work according to his good purpose.
He's saying that the basis on which
you work out your salvation is that God is already at work in you.
God supplies the purpose, the power, and the perseverance for us to continue working out our salvation.
Again, not working for it.
Paul is not calling the Philippians to spiritually pull themselves up by their bootstraps and studies calling them to cooperative grace.
The same God who began the good work
is actively energizing your obedience right now.
Right now.
You're not trying to manufacture holiness.
Rather, you are responding to a God who's already reshaping you from the inside out.
And that's why our bottom line today is not gonna be try harder.
This is not about self-effort.
It's not about spiritual willpower.
It's not about moral bootstrapping.
It's work out what God is already working in you.
Work out what God is already working in you.
And so Paul then turns in verse 14 and gets painfully practical with the Philippian believers when he says, do everything without grumbly and arguing.
This is easy, right?
None of us complain ever, right?
Yeah.
Everything.
A key word right there.
Everything without grumbling or arguing.
Not just the spiritual things.
Not just the big things.
Not just the things we enjoy.
Not just the occasional things.
He says everything.
And grumbling, by the way, for Paul is more than mere belly aching.
It's a posture of distrust toward God.
It's redeemed people talking about life like God hasn't been faithful, like God isn't there.
Now, of course, Paul is also making this statement with a reliance on the Old Testament story that Paul is very familiar with.
Keep in mind, Paul is a Pharisee.
He's a Jewish person rooted in the Scriptures.
He knows his people's story.
And of course, he's alluding to the story of Israel being delivered from Egypt
and then grumbling their way into division and ultimately loss.
The Israelites had experienced deliverance from the enslavement under Pharaoh of Egypt, but they didn't work out their deliverance.
And Paul is saying to the church, don't repeat their story.
Don't let salvation turn into complaint instead of trust.
And Paul includes not only grumbling but arguing,
He says, don't let the community that's meant to be one in the faith fracture over grumbling, pettiness, and disagreements.
Because when this kind of grumbling and arguing dominates, unity collapses.
And when unity collapses, our witness to the world around us dims.
And that leads to what he says in verse 15.
Paul continues with a so that,
I always love these little phrases in the Bible that they should attune us to say, okay, he's going to base what he's about to say on what he just said.
And what he just says is that this means that when we are obedient to God in response to the work he's already done and is doing in us without grumbling or arguing, it leads to something.
It leads to a particular outcome.
So he says that so that you may be blameless and innocent
Children of God without fault in a crooked and perverted generation.
Now why does that matter?
Well again, Paul here is echoing Deuteronomy 32.
Israel God's set apart people was called crooked in Deuteronomy 32, specifically in verses three through six.
The world around the Philippians is crooked too.
It's why Paul is in chains for his faith.
Because the world around is in opposition
to his faith.
And Paul says that when we stand obedient to God in the middle of the surrounding crooked generation, we shine like stars, an image from Daniel 12, the wise shining in the darkness.
Jesus himself said, you're the light of the world.
So that is a church shine.
How do we shine?
How do you shine in the darkness?
Not through branding.
Not through volume, not through dominance and power, but through integrity, through unity, through non-grumbling obedience, by being a community that trusts instead of complains and the people who reflect Christ instead of fracture.
That kind of community shines.
And then in verse 16, he tells us how.
It says, by holding fast to the word of life.
This means clinging to the gospel, the words and the deeds and sacrifice of Jesus.
When we anchor every part of our lives in the person of Jesus, it ultimately brings us true and abundant life.
And Paul wants their faithfulness to be the proof that his labor wasn't wasted.
In other words, a steady Philippian church even validates Paul's own ministry.
Endurance in the faith, sticking to the word of life, remaining faithful to Jesus, is evidence.
And Paul doesn't just command this posture, he models it.
Because in verse 17, he writes, even if I am poured out as a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice.
Their faithful obedience is the main offering.
And Paul says, if my suffering completes it, I'm willing.
Now Paul, by saying that he's a drink offering being poured out, he's picturing himself as a libation, which is being poured out on top of their sacrifice.
And in this world that the Philippians lived in, drink offerings were poured out as acts of worship to the gods.
And so Paul is taking a religious and cultural idea that the Philippians would have been familiar with and would have been brought out of when they came to faith, and instead viewing himself as an offering being poured out to God.
He is labored for their salvation and their endurance in the faith is worth his being poured out like a sacrifice.
Paul is modeling biblical leadership.
when he confidently declares that I will spend myself so that you can grow.
It is worth being poured out for you.
And finally, he includes in verse 18, he calls him to the same joy.
He writes, in the same way, you should also be glad and rejoice with me.
And again, like we've said throughout our study in Philippians,
Joy here is not a denial of pain.
Instead, it is a shared confidence that God is working, that the gospel is true, and that sacrifice is never, ever, ever wasted.
And here's the thread running through it all.
Obedience is not self-generated pressure.
It is responsive participation.
God works in and we work out.
God shapes desire and we act on it.
God energizes transformation and we cooperate with it.
So the call of the passage is simple, but it's searching within us.
Work out what God is working in you.
Let the inner transformation become visible obedience.
Let the humility of Christ take concrete form in the way you live and conduct yourself.
Let the obedience of grumbling, or let the absence of grumbling reveal
trust.
Let your unity shine in a broken world.
Let your life prove the gospel is real.
Not by trying harder, but by letting God work deeper.
Let your outer life reflect God's inner work.
Work out what God is working in you.
But what might that look like to work out what God is working in you?
Well first,
what Paul is saying implies that we are open to what God is working in us, that we are in regular prayer and that we are engaging regularly with scripture.
I actually read a long survey one time that followed people in faith over a long number of years
And it assessed how often they were doing spiritual practices like prayer and engagement with scripture.
And they found that one of the most telling ways or one of the most revealing ways that would lead to transformation was if a person engaged with scripture four or more times a week.
That didn't mean that they sat down and they read 10 chapters of the Bible every day for all of eternity.
It might have meant that they engage with scripture and church like we're doing right now.
Maybe you read a chapter on Monday.
Maybe you got together in a small group or an ABF and you studied through a passage together.
Those kinds of engagement of scripture ended up being the point that led to people's transformation.
They became kinder.
They became more patient, more joyful, more giving.
because they were engaged with the word of God.
And so it's important before we start getting into the working out portion that we take stock of whether we are open to God's working in in us.
Daily, daily.
But supposing we are remaining open to God's work in us, what might it look like in real life circumstances to work it out?
I was thinking this week about some ordinary life circumstances, so let's consider a few scenarios.
When you feel pressure at work, when you feel pressure to massage the numbers, to protect your position, working out what God is working in you means choosing quiet integrity over climbing the ladder and career advantage.
Or how about the group chat that you're in with your friends?
Those are fun, right?
When it fills up with sarcasm and complaint, working out what God is working in you might mean refusing to bond through negativity and choosing steady faithfulness instead.
When you're exhausted as a parent and your child pushes you one more time,
One more time.
Working out what God is working in you may mean slowing your tone instead of raising your voice.
When you're rehearsing your defense in a marital spat, because we all got a win, right?
Working out what God is working in you may mean apologizing first instead of winning the argument.
When you feel overlooked,
or like you're not measuring up.
Working out what God is working in you may mean choosing contentment over constant comparison with others.
At church, when decisions of style or practice don't align with your preferences.
Working out what God is working in you means praying before criticizing and serving without resentment.
When you feel a new conviction, a new hunger for scripture, or a new discomfort with old habits, working out what God is working in you may simply mean responding to that nudge instead of ignoring it.
And when loving faithfully feels costly and unseen, working out what God is working in you may mean staying present and joyful, even when it feels
Like you're being poured out, like a drink offering, like a sacrifice.
Let me ask you something simple.
Where is God already pressing on your heart?
Where is he reshaping your desires?
Where is he nudging you toward obedience?
And before you answer that, let me tell you something I've been watching up close.
I had a real-life picture that really encapsulates this point for me.
My family Christmas got pushed back to January 31st.
It was a late Christmas.
The reason was because my dad was scheduled to have knee surgery in early December.
And he ended up getting sick with a cold that turned into a viral infection.
And he had a delay surgery by two weeks.
And his surgery was going to happen mere days before our family Christmas gathering was going to be.
And we're a bunch that doesn't like to leave each other out.
I wouldn't have felt right not seeing my dad there, to be honest with you.
So we pushed it back to January 31st.
So my dad had a surgery in, you know, every, every surgery, you always wait and
And you get the word, because I'm three hours away, and the surgery was a success.
That's what they always say when your favorite athlete goes through surgery, right?
It was a success.
Because surgeons, they know they never mess up.
But the doctor doing exactly what needed to be done structurally noticed that he repaired the issue in his knee.
But the recovery,
Well, that was harder than expected.
There were complications.
My dad ended up having fevers every night for a month.
I got to be honest with you, I had asked for updates from him or my mom.
And I was getting a little freaked out.
Didn't know what any of that means.
And as you already know, I've told all of you a million times, I have anxiety.
So my head started going to bad places.
And things just made recovery feel nearly impossible.
My dad had no energy to even do the stretches and the walking that were required for his knee to continue to heal.
And of course, this all surprised my dad.
My dad has recovered from much more grueling surgeries this far easier than before.
My dad does not sit around ever, even when he should.
So he's definitely a get to work on the rehab kind of person.
And he couldn't.
This won't be that bad of handled tougher, he thought.
But after surgery comes physical therapy and therapy didn't feel like victory, it felt slow, it felt repetitive, it felt uncomfortable, and the surrounding issues made it at times feel impossible.
Now the knee was technically fixed.
But if you can't move it, if you can't stretch, if you can't do the exercises, the strength cannot return the way it should.
The surgery was the decisive work, but the therapy is the daily participation.
And sometimes the therapy hurts more than expected, especially when you have roadblocks from being able to give yourself to the therapy.
And here's the key.
The exercises don't create the healing.
They cooperate with what the surgeon had already accomplished.
And of course, in this case, in my dad's case, other factors got in the way from being able to cooperate.
My dad's recovery from knee surgery was a lot like life.
God has began doing a work in you at the moment of your salvation.
And your intention is good.
I'm gonna give myself constantly over to God.
And yet life throws its curveballs all the time.
You run into circumstances at work.
You have loved ones that get ill. Life throws you all sorts of speed bumps on the way.
And the question is, while I still give myself over to the work, even when the work gets hard.
That's the message of Philippians 2, 12, or 18.
God has done the saving work.
It is decisive.
You can't do it on your own.
You cannot work your way to your salvation.
But now we are called to work out what He has worked in.
And sometimes that process surprises us.
Sometimes it's harder than we thought it would be or should be.
Sometimes growth is slower than we imagined it would be.
Sometimes obedience feels more uncomfortable than we expected, but that discomfort isn't condemnation.
It may be evidence, evidence that God is working in you.
So let me ask you again, where is God already pressing in your heart?
Maybe it's your tone at home.
Maybe it's your integrity at work.
Maybe it's your posture in church.
Maybe it's a quiet conviction you've been ignoring, but you know you shouldn't.
That pressure that you're feeling may not be shame.
It may be the spirit strengthening what he has already repaired.
And if that's true, you don't need to try any harder.
You need to respond.
Workout.
what God is working in you.
Not perfectly, not instantly, but faithfully.
One small act of obedience at a time.
One resisted grumble.
One humble apology.
One quiet decision to trust instead of complain.
And when we do that together, we shine in the darkness.
Not because we are strong, but because he is already at work.
I hope on your way in that you got a communion packet this morning.
We take communion each Sunday because we remember the work that God has already done through his son, Jesus.
Jesus told His disciples on the night He was betrayed to take the bread and eat because it represents His body which is given for us.
And He tells them likewise to drink from the cup because it represents His blood which was poured out for us.
He acted obediently to the Father so that the work of the Father could take root in us, be done in us,
and be worked out with us.
And so I want you to take a moment and ponder the good work that God has already done, the grace given us through His Son Jesus.
And after that moment of reflection, we will take communion together as one church family.
I invite each one of you to take the bread and eat.
This is his body which is given for us.
And likewise, I invite you to take and drink from this cup.
This is blood which is poured out for us.
Please pray with me.
Dear Lord God, I thank You for the reminder from Paul that the effort toward obedience is not ours to bear alone, but that You began to work for Your Son, Jesus, that He not only saves us by His act of faithfulness at the cross, but that He encourages us and inspires us
toward a life of humility, of self-sacrifice, and of goodness and truth in this world that needs light and needs salt.
I pray that you will help each and every one of us be reminded.
For those of us that haven't made a decision of faith yet,
to be your son, Jesus' disciples.
I pray that you will begin to stir in their hearts the conviction that they can't go this life and the after alone that they need you and they can only get to you through Him.
And I pray for those of us that have made that commitment, but maybe we're not always open to the work that you're doing in us, that you will help us to be open
not turning into a checklist and bear the weight of our shoulders, but be open to the little opportunities to pray, to read scripture, to be open to your word and to your ways so that they can be transformed and live it out.
And then Lord, I pray by the power of your spirit that our faith life doesn't stop at what we learn in your word, but that it is energized daily toward living it out.
and not in the big grandiose ways that will make the news headlines or have books written, but will be those small moments.
Maybe even nobody else sees, but you see.
Help us to make those decisions each day by the power of your spirit and to act on those decisions by your will, your wonder, your might.
Because we know that your ways are good.
Even if we don't experience the benefit in the moment,
We know that your ways are right and true.
Help us in every facet of our lives, every step of faith that we take, and help us to always remember that you are with us in those, and it's in your son Jesus' name that we pray.
Amen.